US President Joe Biden has spoken out
against Israeli Prime Minister uh
Benjamin Netanyahu and his policies on
Gaza in an interview with an American
Spanish language broadcaster Biden said
Netanyahu should call a ceasefire
immediately Pat Goan has more from
Washington now this could be a very
interesting comment from US President
Joe Biden he was doing an interview with
Univision trying to shore up some of his
support with latino voters where he has
been leing in his re-election campaign
so there was mostly domestic questions
but there was one question on the war in
Gaza the reporter asked if the president
believed that Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu was more concerned
with political survival than the
interests of Israel now important
perspective this happened shortly after
there was that attack that we know Biden
was outraged by on the world Central
Kitchen staff but so put that in context
the question was asked President we know
was very angry in that moment but here's
what he had to say I think what he's
doing is a mistake I don't agree with
his I think it's
outrageous that those four three
vehicles were hit by drones and taken
out on a highway where it wasn't like if
it was along the shore it wasn't like
there was a convoy moving there Etc so
I'm what I'm calling for is
for the Israelis to just call for a
ceasefire allow for the next 68 weeks
Total Access to all food and Medicine
going into the country I've spoken with
everyone from the Saudis to the
jordanians to the Egyptians they're
prepared to move in they're prepared to
move this food in and I think there's
there there there's no excuse to not
provide for the medical and the and the
and the and the food needs of those
people they should be done now what
could be important here is that US
president B has always said that there
should be a ceasefire in exchange for
trading of the captives now did he just
misspeak as he sometimes does and then
his staff comes out and says well he
didn't mean that it's not a change of
policy we'll know more on Wednesday
because we expect to hear from President
Biden himself in a a press conference H
so we'll see if this is a change of
policy but he's definitely sending the
message that he is angry with the way
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu has been conducting this war
on Gaza Patty Kain Al jazer Washington
now to discuss this and all the latest
developments in Israel's war on Gaza is
Muhammad al-masri who's a professor at
the Doha Institute for Graduate Studies
joining us on the newsour thank you
Muhammad for being with us what what do
you make of this new criticism leveled
at Netanyahu by Biden do you expect any
concrete changes in US policy as a
result of this growing anger it would
seem from the White House yeah so I sat
here just a couple of days ago and I
talked about how I was less pessimistic
I didn't say I was optimistic but I said
I was less pessimistic um because it
looked like the US was on the verge of
changing course uh perhaps meaningfully
uh in this uh conflict and with regards
to the negotiations the us is going to
be the US they are staunch allies of of
Israel but the US will change course if
they are pressured to and I thought that
the pressure was building up on Biden
because of the upcoming elections
because of the attack on the aid workers
because of the reports coming from
Israeli media that Israel is targeting
civilians at this uh 100 to1 ratio um
that they're uh implementing the the D
Doctrine all of these things are very
embarrassing to the US however over the
past 48 Hours what we've heard is more
rhetoric from the US from Anthony
blinkin from Joe Biden that seems to me
in my reading to be uh supportive of of
Israel and the Israeli narrative and
most notable in that is that the US
continues to advocate for the Israeli
position in these ceasefire negotiations
they're not working or operating as a
neutral Arbiter they're advocating
explicitly for the Israeli position
which is for a temporary ceasefire yeah
interesting also to hear the UK say uh
David Cameron say that he'll continue
arm sales to to uh Israel despite the
growing pressure within the UK for for
the country to hold arm sales to to
Israel in the wake of the killing of the
aid workers what do you think has
changed in in these last few days it's
more of the same it's more of the same I
think that uh we're hearing some some
empty rhetoric some criticisms of Israel
but we've heard this throughout I mean
two months ago people made a big deal
because Joe Biden said that Israel was
bombing indiscriminately when
indiscriminate bombing is a war crime
but what did it mean on the ground it
meant nothing so so far we haven't seen
any tangible change on the ground not
with respect to the weapons not with
respect to the the negotiations or
anything else but do to what extent do
you think the US is willing or able to
use its leverage it's it's definitely
able to use its leverage the US has from
day one uh had the the power and The
Leverage to end this entire War but it
doesn't want to it wants um it's
basically aligned with Israel that it
wants Israel to continue uh uh and
fulfill all of its objectives which
include according to Israel uh
eliminating Hamas completely which is
we're talking about tens of thousands of
of members um and if that's the case
then we're talking about a war that will
go on for many many more months and it
no longer looks like netanyahu's
declaration in December that this would
go on for all of 2024 at least it no
longer looks like that's absurd yeah
there was some hope there'd be a
ceasefire over the Eid holiday which
hasn't materialized we've seen more
Israeli air strikes uh last night on
Gaza but there are reports we've heard
at least reports of some progress in
Egypt that could perhaps lead to a
ceasefire are you optimistic at all that
we could see some movement come out of
Egypt in in the coming days I'm I'm not
particularly optim I wish I could say
otherwise but I'm not particularly
optimistic mostly because the gap
between what Israel wants and what Hamas
wants remains huge Israel wants and the
United States wants for this war to
continue so what they're asking and I
look at this through the lens of
rational Choice Theory political actors
make rational decisions based on
calculations of self-interest I'm not
sure why Hamas would agree to a
temporary truce only to allow Israel to
continue what hundreds and hundreds of
experts have decidedly decreed is a
genocidal War you're asking Hamas to
sign up for the continuation of a
genocide it doesn't really make sense
from their perspective to sign up for
that and um that's the reason why I
don't think that anything's going to get
done at least not right now what about
the Israeli invasion of Rafa does that
seem inevitable to you now it's looking
more and more like it is uh two two days
ago or three days ago I sat here and
said it might not happen because the US
is feeling all this this pressure but
now with the rhetoric it looks like it's
it's going to happen the US doesn't look
at all prepared to use its leverage with
Israel and the disagreement is not about
the invasion TOA if you listen closely
they're just talking about the T the
timing and the specific approach to the
invasion of rafah but the but the United
States doesn't disagree with Israel
about the need to invade rafah or the
need to uh eliminate Hamas Muhammad Alm
very good to get your thoughts on this
as always thank you very much for
joining us m Mastery is from the Doha
Institute of Graduate Studies here in
qat thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from
alaz